From hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel minutes,
our weekly discussion with web
developer and technologist Scott Hanselman.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number two 36. Recorded live
Thursday, October 7th, 2010. Support for Hanselman
it's just provided by Tellerik
rad controls, the most comprehensive
suite of components for windows
forms and asp.net web applications
online@wwwdottelerik.com. In this episode, Scott
talks with Mike Amundson about
rest. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman. This is another episode
of Hanselminutes today. We have
the pleasure of sitting down
with Mike Amundson. He's a
well known author and lecturer.
He's got a dozen books
under his belt, and most
recently the O'Reilly book, restful
web services cookbook. And he's
going to talk to me
about rest today. Thank you
sir, for taking the time
to chat. It's good to
be here. It's good to
talk to you, Scott. So
let's start at the beginning.
Let's assume I know what
what's soap is. I know
what web services are and
I've been spending some number
of years pushing angle brackets
around the wire making request
messages and response messages with,
with soap. What is rest
and how is it different?
Well, it's a good question.
So just to start with
rest, unlike soap rest is
actually just a style. So
it's a style like Gothic
or Swedish modern or Cubist.
So it's not a standard.
It doesn't have any standards
like soap would have. It's
also not a protocol like
HTTP or something like that.
So rest is really a
style that's applied to network
architecture or architectural style. So
it's, it's different in that
sense, but a very often
it's a considered a pattern
or a way to build
applications themselves. So that sounds
like immediately something that could
be argued about because with
soap, there's the GRPC and
there's document literal and it's
either soap or it's not,
it's valid or it's not,
we have trouble inter-operating, but
it's not really something that
one gets to argue about.
Something's either valid soap or
it's not, but if something
is Gothic or Cubist to
art fans could stand in
front of something and argue
about, Oh, I think that's
the Cubist. Does that happen
in rest? Do people argue
about it? Yes. Constantly. In
fact, it's the primary source
of entertainment for some, because
it is a style, it
does definitely lend itself to
lots of interpretation. And that's
both the beauty and the
curse of working in something
like that. But it's well
along the lines of other,
you know, architectural styles, such
as a pipe and filter
or what used to be
called  where component and
connector, which was, you know,
very popular during the local
network or age. So it's,
it's not like it's totally
unidentifiable in matter of fact,
it might be the case
that I know it when
I see it or something
like that, but there's certainly
lots and lots of room
for argumentation and interpretation. But
what, with all styles, someone
Inish is typically recognized as
the creator of that style.
And you could, you know,
you, I love your example
of, you know, cubism versus
Gothic versus sweet is that
you could say, well, this
is the person who innovated
in that space first. Why
don't we just go to
the guy who invented rest
and then he will settle
all of our arguments. Yes,
that that's true. And actually
there is a guy who,
who coined the term, Roy
fielding in a dissertation 10
years ago, actually in one
chapter of a, I think
it's a six or seven
chapter dissertation on network style
analysis, coins rest as a
particular style. And there are
lots of people who appeal
to Roy. It's sort of
like, well, what would Roy
do? Or what did Roy
say, commonly in the discussions,
it's the appeal to authority
model? Well, you know, Roy
wouldn't do that or something
like that. So that goes
on quite a bit, but
Fielding's dissertation outlines the details
of, of the particular style
he mentioned. And actually I
think quite successfully points out
the, what he calls the
constraints that make up the
style. In other words, if
you follow this series of
constraints and he gives reasons
for why each one should
exist, then that's a particular
style that he calls rest.
Okay. So let's try to
get into the, the, the
concrete for those who maybe
haven't gotten a sense yet
of what this is, what
is, what is rest, what
did he describe and what
does it look like with
the co and with HTTP
kind of at its core?
Yeah, basically what, what fielding
was talking about is the
idea that there's a, there's
a particular style for distributed
network applications that can be
very effective and very efficient.
And he outlines a series
of steps and uses after
he, after he outlines these
steps uses HTTP as the
example. So he actually has
a chapter on the style
and the chapter on whether
or not the style is
actually matches HTTP very well
or not. And he does
this because he was actually
working on the HTTP spec
while he was writing his
dissertation. They're kind of cross
fertilizing quite a bit, but
to be more specific, he
actually names just a handful
of constraints or particular items
that would identify something as
a restful style of architecture.
So it's like, you know,
relatively general terms like it's
a client server app, it
uses stateless messaging back and
forth. It employs a cash
or can support a cash
in between any participants in
the network. It's got a
very limited interface between parties
and it also is built
as a layered system. So
systems can join at any
time or leave at any
time without breaking anything. And
then it's got an extra
step of it's possible that
if none of this works
perfectly, you can actually send
code between parties, mobile code
or code on demand. That's
sort of his, you know,
minimal set of what he
calls, constraints that make up
that rest style. So when
I encounter rest or get
into arguments around about rest
in the wild, I typically
hear it expressed as well.
They took crud, create, read,
update, delete, and they basically
mapped it to some existing
verbs in HTTP and post
put, delete, and get, and
it all, it all maps
very nicely, you know, read
as get and yada yada,
yada, and, and that's rest.
Why is that such a
common explanation? If it's more
complicated than, Yeah, it's actually
more complicated and in some
ways, following the crud pattern
can lead you sort of
down the wrong path. You're
going to, if you're going
to be arrested purist type
raft, actually doesn't talk at
all about read, write, update,
or delete or any of
those kinds of things. And
it really talks only in
comparison about HTTP, actually, a
lot of what we commonly
talk about in the wild
as rest, we're really talking
about HTTP, which is a
standard there's definitely a right
and wrong. There are definitely
things you must in may
and should and may not
do. And all those kinds
of things. So very often
when I ended up talking
to folks, we're really sort
of slipping into talking about
a protocol called HTTP rather
than rest itself. Okay. So
with HTTP, there's an, a
kind of an implied envelope
because the body of the
message itself is an envelope.
HTP has headers well with
soap. So pad it's its
own envelope system. So because
it was protocol neutral, I
could take a soap message
and the headers in the
body, and I could take
it around. I could put
it in an MQ. I
could email the soap message.
Does, does rest need HTTP
and its associated metadata? Or
can I apply the rest
to another protocol? Right? So
it's actually, that's a, that's
a great sort of summary
of some comparisons about one
application protocol to another, the
soap pattern to the HTTP
pattern, right? So HTTP has
this header space, this metadata
space, and then the body
of, of itself, the actual
message, right? And rest itself
doesn't make any direct claims
except to say that, you
know, Roy's architectural model makes
a big deal about data
itself as part of the
NEC network architecture. You've got
components that do work connectors
that talk to each other
and data as another component
for the architecture. So to
Roy, the idea of moving
data around, it's not actually
just the information, but it's
also the meta data. The
there are request metadata, there's
response, metadata, there's metadata about
the message itself. So there's
lots of extra stuff. So
in that sense, HTTP then
has this set of what
they call headers. That's where
they store metadata. And then
there's the body of the
message itself. And that looks
very, very similar to a
soap. So does the same
thing because soap has extensions
and so patters and all
those other things that are
very similar, a soap does
it all as a single
message, because again, they want
it to be, be able
to cross different protocols. HTTP
is really that same whole
picture for one application protocol.
Okay. So I can easily
apply rest or other protocols.
You never hear about people
emailing rest messages or putting
West messages on in mainframes.
Right? Well that's because there's
not really a rest message,
right? There's a message that
has these bits, but rest
is the, is sort of
the architectural pattern. Yeah. You
can apply that rest pattern
to, to more than one
particular application level protocol. If
we talk about the, the
various pieces of what Roy
points out as the protocol,
the client server, the stateless,
the cache, the uniform interface,
those can exist without any
particular protocol. They can, they
can be something else. I
am sure that HTTP won't
be around forever. And you
could still use the same
architectural pattern for some other
kind of protocol. This is
the part of the show
where I mock you while
actually Tellerik mock says your
applications that you're testing dependent
on external systems over which
you have no control. Maybe
you're being slowed down by
those systems, their lack of
availability, responsiveness. Do you want
to do TDD? Right? Our
friends at Telerx help you
solve some of those problems
with their newest marketing tool.
Just mock it'll let you
do fast, simple controlled unit
tests, independent of external resources
like databases, web services, proprietary
code, unlike some mocking tools,
just mock works with non-virtual
methods, seal classes, static methods,
giving you a complete control
of your code. You can
get more details. You can
download just mock at tellerik.com/just
mock. And don't forget to
thank Tellerik for supporting Hanselman
it's on their Facebook fan
page, facebook.com/tellerik. Thanks a lot.
I see a lot of
people creating systems that they
say are rest, but then
they end up being what
other people call pox, just
plain old XML, where you
do a get, and some
angle brackets come back. And
I say, look at my
restful System that I've built
is, is parks a bad
thing? Or can they call
that? Are they allowed to
call that rest? Right? Is
pots a bad thing? No.
Can you call it rest?
Yeah, you could. But it's
just like you could say,
Hey, this, this is my
Cubist painting, but I think
one of the things, one
of the things I mentioned
in the list of that
Roy outlines in his dissertation,
when he calls his constraints
is a uniform interface. And
that uniform interface has a
lot to do with how
messages are sent around or
how components and connectors talk
to each other. And one
of the items he mentioned
that is a part of
that interface is the notion
of hypermedia as the engine
of application state or hypermedia
constraint. And hypermedia is the
links that we have inside
a message, the links that
tell us what we can
do next, the link that
tell us what's possible. Can
I send a search? Can
I make a query? Can
I write data to the
server? And typically the pox
pattern or poco or POJO
or any of those terms,
don't contain that hypermedia information
or that hyperlinking information. And,
and that's what separates it
fielding makes a big deal
about how important hypermedia is
in order to make his
particular style of network architecture
work. So would something like
Adam pub be a hypermedia
document in that, in that
it's a, it's an XML
document with links that describe
what you could potentially do
to that document. That's a
great example. You've got two,
two specs, right? You've got
the Adam's syndication format, and
then you've got Adam pub
and that Adam pub RFC,
that documentation actually explains how
to locate links inside the
message and what those links.
I don't understand what those
links mean. You've got REL
equals edit for example, or
you've got rules about how
you can create a message,
which link to find insight
and return message in order
to know how to create
a new item in the
collection. So that document is
specifically documenting the hypermedia aspect
of an atom message. So
Adam is a great example
of a hypermedia format that
works very well in this
restful architectural style. So given
the restful architectural style that
it's out there, it exists
and it's reasonably well understood.
Although there was not a
sample application I can get,
there's nothing I can point
to that says, this is
perfect. This is the pinnacle.
If I were to go
and design something like a
bank, and I'm standing on
the shoulders of giants, or
at least on the shoulders
of one guy with a
PhD, what does rest give
me to start with? When
I sit down and I
save file new project, or
I start white boarding, where
do I start? Right. And,
and, and that's, that's a
great question. When you think
about it, whenever you start
to build a, you know,
a large scale system, you're
going to start asking yourself,
am I going to start,
am I going to use
client server? Am I going
to support caches? Am I
going to support some kind
of limited interface between all
the components that they all
understand? You're really developing an
architectural style and you can
do that from scratch each
time and identify properties of
a system that you like
such as all the components
can talk to each other,
or messages can be cached
and replayed later kind of
thing, and then decide the
constraints that you need. Or
you can start from existing
models, like Fielding's model example
in his fifth chapter of
his dissertation, and start from
there and maybe take that
whole cloth or take that
and modify it in any
way you see fit. So
in building a bank, I
might say, well, do I
need to have, do I
need to communicate across lots?
And lots of clients support,
maybe lots and lots of
servers and things that I
don't own myself. If I,
if I can't build all
those parts, this restful style
that has these disconnected components,
where data is just important
as a component probably works
really well as a starting
place. Hmm. What kind of
misunderstandings would I bump into?
Like what, what, what's a
major mistake that is commonly
made if I were, if
I were building the system.
Oh, that's a, that's a
great, that's a great question
that that could go on
for awhile, but I can
tell you when I talk
to folks, but the sort
of the misunderstanding pattern is,
I think we mentioned this
earlier, the idea that often
what we're really talking, what
we want to talk about
is the application protocol HTTP
and not the, the network
style rests. So a lot
of times when you're discussing
things, it's important to know,
you know, which one you're
you're focused on. But I
think some typical examples are
when I see people talk
about doing rest very often,
they say, well, I've got
really well-designed URLs, or they
call them URS in the,
you know, sometimes. So I've,
I've, I've made sure that
I've got the right slashes
and names and all those
kinds of things. And it
turns out in this architectural
style that fielding talks about
the actual details of the
URL. Don't matter at all.
There's nothing important, except for
the very large grain, there's
a protocol front end, there's
a net domain name server.
There's a domain server name.
There's some segments that have
slashes and there's some stuff
that goes after it. That's
all rest cares about. It
can be all glitz and
it doesn't matter. So the
idea of spending a lot
of time crafting URS, that's
not going to get you
any closer to rest than,
than doing anything else. That's,
that's one of the biggest
ones. And I think the
second one is the idea
that what rest really talks
about is this notion of
mapping credit activity to an
application protocol like HTTP. And
again, rest doesn't even talk
about credit. Doesn't talk about
those, those items at all.
It, so spending a lot
of time figuring out which
HTTP method goes with, which
you are. I is not
really going to improve the
situation a lot either. So
I think those are the
two biggest ones that I
see coming out of discussions
about this. Okay. So hang
on. So this is a
big deal here. You've just
said that worrying about how
pretty your URS are, is
not something that's going to
get you closer to, to
rest in its purest sense.
Yeah. Or, or in any
sense, because rest, doesn't talk
about what the URS ought
to look like. In fact,
it's really important that both
client and server not get
bound up in exactly what
the URI looks like. If
you think about the fact
that I'm writing the client
and you're writing the server,
you want to make sure
as a server writer, if
you need to move that
to another server, or if
you need to change some
kind of technology in some
way that you can safely
do that. And that my
client won't break, just because
you changed a couple of
letters in a URI, that's
a restful aspect of, of
a, of an architectural style.
So if I, as a
client, get all excited about
your documentation, about what a
URL looks like. I could
be in a lot of
trouble if you ever move
your server. So now I
feel like you've kind of
pulled the rug out from
under me, and I've got
nothing to hold on to.
People are always saying restful
your eyes and how fortunate
it is that these you
arise are so, so neat.
They think of like the
term restful your eyes is
kind of a hackable or
friendly that you should spend
time thinking about what your,
your eye looks like, such
that it is a, almost
a user interface element. And
that's not an, a component
of rest as a pattern
at all. No, it's, it's
not a component of rest
at all. I think, I
think it was a Tim
burners. Lee has a, has
a great piece on the
web about what is it,
a cool your eyes don't
change, right? And that doesn't
have anything to do with
an architectural style. It has
to do with Tim's focus
on the notion that once
you put a URI out
there, you can't really take
it back or you, you,
you shouldn't just change things,
Willy nilly. And that's certainly
important. But rest as this
pattern, or as this architectural
view, isn't really concerned about
the actual details of what
they look like, just that
clients and servers know how
to locate them and understand
what they mean or what
they represent. And that's the
exciting part. So when I
talk to people about this
hypermedia pattern, it doesn't matter
what H ref equals, but
it does matter what REL
equals because that's what a
client can bind to. If
it says REL edit, I
can take whatever that that
URI is. And I know
that that's the URI to
use for editing a particular
record. That's the exciting part.
I see. So now I
feel like we're getting to
something I can, I can
use the, the fact that
I can refer to other
things that I can do
with them. That message, like
you said, REL equals edit.
And I can say I
have some, some, some resource
of a book and I
want to edit that book.
Now. I, what the URI
Is for that book. If
the URI is not going
to change, if Tim burners
Lee says respect the permalink,
does it really matter if
it's in that REL equals
edit? Can't it just be
a convention? And then I
don't need to mention it
at all. Sure. If, if
you're sure that that will
never change, you can probably
tell all your clients to
write that in. I mean,
they can code it right
into the hard code. Right.
But if you think that
might change you, you want
to make sure that your,
your clients don't get stuck.
If something goes along the
way, like you have to
redeploy everything. Think if we
had to redeploy browsers, every
time somebody changed the website,
right? You don't want that.
So, yeah. And this is
exactly what you start to
think about going back to
your bank idea, if, if
you're sure that these things
will never change, that's an
aspect of your architectural style
when you build servers and
clients that you don't need
to focus on. Okay. In
reality, I think nobody can
guarantee that, that stuff isn't
going to change at some
point it's possible though. Are
there some examples of some
really good API APIs that
you, that you point to
and you say, Oh, they
really got it, right? Yeah.
That's, that's a great question.
And to be honest, there,
there's a couple of things.
Really good. I would say
one of the ones that
I really like to work
with is one that I'm
not sure a lot of
people know about. It's called
friend feed. So it's another
one of these aggregator services,
but friend feeds initial interface.
Like it's HTML interface actually
works very much like its
API. And I think they
do a very, very good
job with that. I think
they do a good job
and the way they do
logins and the way they,
they add links to their
replies and stuff like that.
So I think that's a
pretty good example. Gmail or
Google does an awful lot
of really, really good things
as well. Most Adam based
systems also do a very
good job as long as
they focus on, you know,
returning links in those payloads,
you're really doing a very
good job of making it
possible for new clients to
be built using just the
spec and not knowing all
the details for, for, for
having new servers join up
or, or things like that.
So I think those are,
those are some really good
examples. Is this ever going
to get easier? I mean,
because it's a style it's
always going to be someone's
opinion about whether or not
I did it the right
way. Well, I would say
what you want to think
about. And I've talked to
a few people who do
this is you may not
want to become a follower
of this particular style. In
other words, you don't, you
may not say I'm going
to write rest from now
on. I actually Roy's dissertation
is not about rest. Rest
was the example, what his
dissertation about was how to
analyze existing architectural styles and
how to actually identify styles
in existing systems. And really
the idea behind all that
was in order to come
up with a working pattern
for creating your own architectural
style, that's reasoned and, you
know, solve the problems you
want to solve. It turns
out people got really excited
about that one chapter, and
I've actually heard him in
a couple of cases, say
he was rather frustrated by
that because his dissertation is
really about network style analysis,
not about one particular example
he gave, but I know
people who, again, going back
to your bank example, use
Roy's dissertation as a lead
on how they can identify
properties. They want to induce
in a large system constraints
that they need to place
on the way components and
connectors and data is handled
in order to get those
properties. And they ended up
inventing their own very well
reasoned and very successful style.
And I think that's the
goal that everybody really wants.
They don't want to just
say I'm doing a particular
style. They want something that
really solves their own problem.
Well, it definitely sounds that
we should stop using rest
as a weapon and remember
that as a style and
not something that you can
go and Reno run a
test against or compile and
say, look it compiled it's
rest. Right? Exactly, exactly. Right.
Treated as an example for
creating an architecture that solves
your problems. And I think
then it becomes a really
handy, really handy thing to
work with. Fantastic. Well, thanks
so much, Mike, for, for
spending time with us on
the show today, I enjoyed
it. Good to talk to
you. Thanks for having me,
Scott. This has been another
episode of Hansel minutes. See
you again next week.